---
layout: post
title:  "/r/dailyprogrammer Easy 236 C - Tetris Random "
date:   2015-10-21-16-22-49
categories: dailyprogrammer c
---

This challenge described [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/dailyprogrammer/comments/3ofsyb/20151012_challenge_236_easy_random_bag_system/) explains that the randomness in Tetris is not what many thing, it doesn't simply spew random pieces or "tetreminos" at you but simulates selection without replacement from a bag, thus you may only get two of the same in a row and will never go more than 6 pieces without seeing a particular one.

The challenge is to replicate this effect. Most experienced programmers will immeditaly realise that the best way to do this is with a shuffle in particular a [Knuth shuffle AKA Fischer-Yates shuffle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fisher%E2%80%93Yates_shuffle). The reddit thread was littered with inexperienced programmers re-inventing the wheel (poorly).

Here was my code which sparked outrage, (rightly so some of it is disturbingly - but in a fun way).

{% highlight c %}
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <stdint.h>

void shuffle();
uint32_t rand;
char string[] = "OISZLJT";
const int len = 7;

int main(int argc, char **argv) {
	int i = 8;
	char buffer[56];
//	printf("rand: %d, &i: %p\n", rand, &i);
	rand += &i;		// I am a filthy pig and should be shot

	while( i-- ){
                shuffle();
		strncpy(buffer+7*i, string, 7);
        }
	buffer[50] = 0;
	puts(buffer);
        return 0;
}

void shuffle() {
	int i, j;
	/* FIsher-Yates/Knuth shuffle */
	for(i = len - 1; i >=0 ; i--) {
		j = rand % (i + 1);
		string[len] = string[i];
		string[i] = string[j];
		string[j] = string[len];
/* Rand as LCG
William H. Press, Saul A. Teukolsky, William T. Vetterling and Brian P. Flannery
Rand is modulo 32bit
*/
		rand *= 1013904223;
		rand += 1664525;
	}
        string[len] = 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

Lets break this one down. The most interesting thing about my code is it is probably nearly identical to most conventional code however I do re-invent the wheel and do so well!

Firstly, I don't bother linking to random for my random numbers I use a linear congruent generator and optimize it by making use of the fact that a uint32_t is effectively a 2^32 modulo. I borrow a multiplier and increment from Numerical Recepies. There is a flaw in this I'll leave it for the reader to work out. (i.e. I've made a simple mistake in the implementation it's not optimal).

I also do the Knuth shuffle myself this is likely what all shuffling implementations do, and certainly what python's random.shuffle() does.

However, the number one mistake I noticed on the reddit thread was _incorrect_ knuth shuffle implementation. The commonest error is shuffling each card into the entire deck. It's pretty lengthy to explain why this is a problem and if I'm honest I don't entirely recall how it's explained in the book I first learnt the algo from... but essentially by doing it this way you introduce a slight extra shuffle towards one side of the deck. Or something... [This link explains it well.](http://blog.codinghorror.com/the-danger-of-naivete/)
{% highlight c %}
/*
This is bad _DO_NOT_ do this.
*/
int i, j;
char *temp;
char string[] = "SHUFFLE ME!";
int len = strlen(string);
for(i = 0; i < len; i++){
	j = rand(len);		// We screw up here.
	temp = pieces[i];
	pieces[i] = pieces[j];
	pieces[j] = temp;
}
/*
This is how it should be done.
*/
int i, j;
char *temp;
char string[] = "SHUFFLE ME!";
int len = strlen(string);
for(i = 0; i < len; i++){
	j = rand(len - i);		// This is correct.
	temp = pieces[i];
	pieces[i] = pieces[j];
	pieces[j] = temp;
}
{% endhighlight %}
This is rather simply but there are a few delightful tricks in it. Firstly char [] string is _not a string_ I lose the null termination early. It's a char array. It is a buffer. I use the null byte as my temp storage in the knuth shuffle :)

Also without srand() how do I seed the LCG? Well I use my ASLR of course and attempted to use the uninitialised rand variable however gcc seems to clear the stack in it's prolouge. (nuts...) Still the ASLR provides plenty of randomness for such a simple task.

The only thing worth mentioning is the buffer+7*i indexing. This simply moves along the large buffer equvilent to &buffer[7*i].

I got a few PMs about this code being an abomination but it runs gloriously. And is in effect portable assembler.

I know what the compiler will do with this code. I can picture what the assembly will look like that is so great about c and what is lost in c++!

Enjoy.

This post is a bit belated and the latest challenge is now out 237, however it's boring so my next post will be using c as an anagram finder using binary tree's and linked lists to make a library you access from python.

Python can solve the current challenge in a few lines (like most of them which makes for uninsteresing blog posts!)

Ali

Errata:

25-10-2015 Changed %x to %p this is an odd habit I have, I forget to use %p and end up with a cast warning by using %x.
